---
layout: post
title:  "The 2026 Budget"
date:   2026-05-17 20:00:00 +1000
categories: Analysis
tags: housing_policy
---
Straight out of the gate, I want to note that I think this is a pretty good budget. But of course I'd say that, I read [Ross Gittins](https://www.theage.com.au/politics/federal/it-pains-me-to-say-nice-things-about-politicians-but-this-is-a-good-budget-20260512-p5zw5r.html).

Even so, I think there's still a lot of work that needs to be done in the field of tax reform and this budget leaves a little to be desired. Nonetheless, it's shown Albo has worked up the courage to take risks, and it makes me feel cautiously optimistic about the potential for further difficult reforms, but we'll have to wait and see about that.

The first big topic, and the one I'm probably most pleased about, is the changes to negative gearing and capital gains tax discounts. For those who don't know, negative gearing essentially allows you to claim tax refunds when you accrue a loss on a rental property you own. It can make it lucrative to rent out a property even if you can't raise the rents high enough to cover your costs. The CGT is a tax you pay when you sell an asset; if you sell the asset after twelve months, you get a discount on that tax. Negative gearing can now only be used for newly built houses, with the change grandparented so anyone currently eligible to negatively gear a property is not affected. The CGT discount, meanwhile, has been reduced from 50% to 30%.

The stated aim of these changes is to improve housing affordability. This is because if an investor no longer has the option of negative gearing, then they're unlikely to want to take the risk of buying a property to rent it out. The CGT change also makes it less appealing to buy properties for the purpose of selling them later at a higher price. Some might complain that this is taking away opportunities for Australians to gain wealth through buying property. I would argue that's a good thing. Property investment is a relatively unproductive form of investment: you buy the house and it just naturally becomes more valuable without you needing to do all that much work. It also makes the price of housing higher, which means the rest of the population has to spend more money servicing mortgages (or rent) instead of being able to spend it on the rest of the economy. Other investments, like buying shares on the stock market, give money to people so they can produce goods or services we need or desire. While there definitely are people out there who prefer to rent, and landlords are obviously providing that service, buying a property isn't _producing_ anything (unless perhaps they're fixing up a house to make it liveable). And regardless of whether it helps the economy, many Australians in recent years have been struggling to buy their first home, let alone investment properties, and so these tax benefits have only been helping those who already have wealth to get richer. Concurrently, Labor has also announced some tax offsets for workers. The idea here being that they're encouraging people to earn money by working more rather than through more passive methods. If people feel incentivised to work harder, it should improve productivity.

People have also warned removing negative gearing could cause rent increases since landlords will no longer manage to earn money unless the rents cover their expenses. To that, I have three responses. The first is that I do not think many landlords are keeping rents low out of the goodness of their heart and if they're not hiking them up higher it's because that's the limit people are willing to pay. Secondly, if people are not making a profit renting out a property then perhaps they should sell it. That would increase the supply on the housing market and lower house costs, which is exactly the reason the government is introducing this change. And finally, negative gearing still applies to new builds, which means investors can rent those out at a loss to their hearts' content, thus encouraging more new homes to be built, increasing housing supply and, again, reducing the cost of buying a home. Not to mention it won't affect rents in the near term because, since the change is grandparented, landlords who currently own a property can continue to negatively gear it. There is the mild risk that people will refuse to sell their currently-owned properties so they can keep negatively gearing them, but I'm not convinced that will do more than just delay things.

I should pause briefly here to note that my family owns several houses and so I have benefitted from property investment. I'm not saying no one should invest in property, I just dislike that it's become such a popular form of investment due to years of government policy that has encouraged it.

Now, if getting rid of negative gearing is so great, why did Bill Shorten lose two elections campaigning to do that? Why would Labor decide to cut it now after promising not to touch it last election?

The thing is, I don't think it ws quite as unpopular as one might think. Shorten campaigned on it because he knew it was an issue that younger voters cared about and it was often paraded about in some segments of the media and online as though it were a cure-all to fixing the housing crisis (which it's not, even if it will probably help). Indeed, Shorten didn't do all that badly in either of his election campaigns (his abysmal charisma and a confusingly bloated list of promises were probably more to blame than any one policy). In addition, while I dislike crudely splitting people by arbitrary 'generational' divides, it has been noted that Gen Y and Gen Z voters now outnumber Baby Boomers in the elegible voting population. These younger voters are the ones increasingly disillusioned with the state of the housing market and less likely to benefit from these policies in the near future, meaning there is not a whole lot of electoral risk (except perhaps the optics of breaking a promise, but that could be solved with some good spin so I don't think it's too big an issue). Not to mention the grandparenting of the changes means no one is _currently_ losing anything: they're only losing the potential opportunity of benefits, which people aren't as likely to miss.

Former Treasury Secretary Ken Henry has been going on for quite some time about what he likes to call 'intergenerational bastardry': that the actions of successive governments have resulted in young people are paying more income tax to pay for services used by older generations and to help out vested interests (e.g. the mining and logging industries, who, he notes, only employ about 2% of the workforce). Treasurer Jim Chalmers has started to talk about 'intergenerational barstardry' as well (albeit, perhaps not as crudely). The fact is that people have increasingly become frustrated with the status quo, to the point we're seeing voters feel so bad about the future that they're voting for _Pauline Hanson_ of all people to fix things. There is a hunger for major changes and changing tax laws to benefit workers struggling to make ends meet over wealthy investors is the government's response to those calls and I think it's an appropriate response.

But are these changes all that impressive? The numbers suggest the answer is 'no, not really'. The fact negative gearing can still apply to new homes means it shouldn't inadvertantly cause reductions in the house supply or increases rents, but the change has also been grandparented, which so its effects will not be felt for quite a while yet. The other thing is that housing affordability can only really improve once supply improves, and that means more houses need to be built and that is easier announced than done. Regardless, the _appearance_ of acting can often matter as much as (if not more so than) concrete actions. Taken as a whole, the tax changes (including the new 30% minimum tax on discretionary trust distributions, which I haven't talked about but also support) paints a picture of fairness: wealth being more fairly distributed to support our society. The government will be hoping that this matches the mood of the nation.

It won't do anything to sate those who think all our problems are caused by large immigration numbers, however. And since we're talking about that, let's look at our old mate Angus Taylor, leader of the opposition-in-exile, and his budget reply speech.

I should not be so harsh on Angus since not all of his ideas are bad. The best one is to get rid of bracket creep by indexing income tax bands to inflation. 'Bracket creep' for those that don't know, is when your wage gets pushed up because of inflation and you end up in a higher tax bracket. Your income may have increased, but the purchasing power hasn't due to the fact it's only moved in line with inflation, but you're now paying more tax. Bracket creep is obviously more of an issue in periods of high inflation (i.e. now), but the reason governments have pretty much never done anything serious to deal with it is because it's a sneaky way to increase taxes without actively doing it. It is thus a _very_ useful source of revenue. And indeed, Taylor's plan will result in lost revenue—his own numbers put it at $22.5 bllion over four years. The other reason governments love bracket creep is they can announce tax cuts to periodically reduce its effects: if it didn't exist, people simple wouldn't notice they were even paying less tax. The pros and cons of this can be debated, but in theory at least I think eliminating bracket creep would make for a fairer, more progressive taxation system.

He (predictably) promised to undo the negative gearing and CGT changes, which I've just spend several paragraphs defending, so I think I can leave it at that.

And his other big plans were to do with immigration: to make immigration numbers dependent on the number of new home builds and to cut non-citizen residents off from things like welfare and the NDIS. The first sounds sensible on paper—how can you accept more people than you can house?—but I'm sceptical about how it would work in practice. I feel there would definitely be a lot of unintended consequences economically. On the other hand, it's probably better than just setting an arbitrary limit. The second though is, in my view, both cruel _and_ stupid. These are people who've come here, trying to make a better live for themselves, often working to support our economy and possibly waiting to get citizenship still. They're the relatives of citizens: elderly grandparents who migrated decades ago but never got around to getting naturalised, or cousins who have come here to join their family who are already citizens (I note, I had a cousin like that, but she ultimately went back to Italy, and it can take a _very_ long time to get citizenship). Think of how many families would be affected by this sort of change, and think about which electorates they're mostly concentrated in. I do not think this is a recipe for electoral success. Both of these policies are blatant attempts by the Coalition to bring those who have defected to One Nation back into the fold, and again, maybe it'll work, but Hanson would still have more credibility about this, so those voters simply may not return.

On the topic of benefits and social services, we should spare a moment for the other big budget announcement: the cuts to the NDIS. Another disclaimer: I have a relative who is on the NDIS and so I have a vested interest in it being well funded. Even so, I do think that there are good grounds for reigning in its spending. A major one is that the NDIS needs people to support its continued existence, and if costs balloon, then it could lead to worse outcomes down the track if it becomes too politically cumbersome to defend. A lot of the anger about it, however, has been directed at dodgy behaviour from NDIS providers and mismanagement of the scheme by the government, rather than the number of people on the scheme, and so that may not make these cuts very appealing. The other reasons I have for tentatively supporting the cuts are to do with the fact the NDIS has mostly replaced support from state governments, which was not the intended outcome of the NDIS. I am hopeful that the cuts will result in a restructuring of support services into a more sustainable form than a complete abandonment of those who depend on it. But these are seriously big cuts, I do want to underline that fact. Some people will definitely be losing out since they'll no longer qualify for it, and while it is nice to have well-defined limits, it can be difficult to draw those lines when it comes to real people.

Finally, I'd like to talk about what I'm most disappointed we didn't see in the budget: a tax on gas or other extractive industries. It's got very strong support: even Clive Palmer (!!!) wants it to be taxed (possibly the first time I've ever agreed with Palmer on anything). Like I said, the government gets a lot (arguably too much) of its revenue from income tax (also the tobacco excise, which is being undermined by illegal cigarettes, but I digress). Putting a tax on industries like gas and mining would be a good way to balance the system and improve the budget's bottom line and transfer the tax burden away from the individual and towards multinationals who are profitting off our natural resources (while charging us with inflated prices for our own gas). Ideally, I'd love a carbon tax, but that is, to use an Abbottism, "dead, buried and cremated". I think Albo is receptive to the idea of a tax on gas, and if it weren't for the Iran war he would have implemented it in this budget. Right now, it would be in poor taste given he leveraged our gas iexports to get fuel guarantees, and he wouldn't want to be seen to be possibly adding to energy costs. Perhaps it'll be in the next budget if the war ends and shipping returns to normal.

That, however, is a big 'if', and it's also why I'm not going to spend any time talking about the budget's projections. They hang so much on the war and fuel prices that I simply do not have anything worth saying: there are just too many thngs that can't be predicted.

Regardless, a decent budget overall. It could have gone a lot further, and indeed probably should have, but I think it shows there's still some life in the ALP and I hope it's a sign of further reform to come.