---
layout: post
title:  "So It's Come to This: The Rise of One Nation"
date:   2026-02-16 08:00:00 +1000
categories: Prognostications
tags: One_Nation
---
First of all, it’s useful to discuss the history of One Nation: in the 1996 election (Keating V. Howard, Howard won in a landslide), Pauline Hanson was elected to the House of Reps in the Queensland seat of Oxley. She was initially preselected as a Liberal Party candidate, but during the campaign made a number of racist comments (foremost being her claim that Indigenous Australians should have their benefits cut since they were, in her belief, gaming the system). Howard disowned her (though by this stage it was too late to take her off the ballot and she was still listed as a Liberal), but she still won. Her maiden speech is famous for warning that Australia was at risk of being ‘swamped by Asians’. She set up One Nation, but failed to regain her seat at the following election in 1998. Howard (in one of the few acts I respect him for) refused to enter into any preference deal with Hanson (i.e. ‘put me second and I’ll put you second’) and this helped stifle her support.

(A brief note: Preference deals for the House of Reps are not particularly valuable since they require the voters to follow the how to vote card, which they often ignore. Deals in the Senate used to be more useful due to group ticket voting, but thanks to Turnbull’s reforms to Senate voting, this benefit has also been somewhat reduced. Still, how-to-vote cards are followed by many voters, particularly those who don't pay attention to politics and those in electorates with many candidates)

Hanson was then in the political wilderness for a while. Her party managed to win 11 seats in the Queensland state election, but it promptly imploded due to internal divisions and her support with voters collapsed.

It wasn’t until about 2016 that we see the resurgence of Hanson as a political force to be reckoned with. Her party was one of the (many) parties that held the balance of power in the Senate under Turnbull. She’d managed to win four Senate seats (making her the fourth largest party (if you consider the Coalition as a single party)). This was also the era of her first burqa stunt and her ‘swamped by Muslims’ speech (Hanson is very much a one-trick pony). Her party again suffered from internal division (two of her senators were declared ineligible to sit in Parliament during the Citizenship Crisis (One Nation? More like Two Nations) and the senators that replaced them defected). She was reduced to just two seats in the 2019 election.

There are three main takeaways from this:
1. Hanson has been remarkably consistent in her messaging.
2. Hanson cannot control her party.
3. Hanson is nothing if not resilient.

Now, the current situation.

As we should all remember, in 2022, the Coalition lost and ended up choosing Peter Dutton as their leader. He was exactly the type to cater towards the voters who might defect to One Nation: racist, tough on immigration, anti-Indigenous rights, anti-renewables. But he also made the decision to change the Coalition’s long-standing policy on One Nation by agreeing to do a preference deal with Hanson.

This was stupid for two reasons: it legitimises Hanson when she is a nutjob who you would not want to have to deal with in the Senate, let alone both houses of Parliament, and One Nation supporters are very unpredictable in their voting patterns:

As you can see, the ‘preference deal’ only secured Dutton an extra 10 percentage points of One Nation preferences. Labor, on the other hand, can very easily count on large preference flows from the Greens (who polled higher than One Nation, for that matter) and thus do not suffer from this sort of bleeding on their left flank.

The reason Dutton probably did this, though, is because polls suggested he wasn’t able to stem the bleeding to One Nation. There were times it seemed they’d achieve as much as 10% of the vote. He probably thought that if he couldn’t win them over, he could at least ensure they didn’t leak preferences to Labor and thus use that support to eke out a victory.

This plan failed abysmally on two other fronts. The first was that One Nation only ended up with 6.4% of the vote (well behind the Greens on 12.2%) and thus even if they had given over 90% of preferences to the Coalition it probably wouldn’t have given Dutton enough preferences to win. The second was that it further degraded the Liberals’ credibility in the inner-city suburbs that were once their heartland. It didn’t cause their defeat in and of itself, but it would have cemented the idea that the Liberal party was more ‘National’ than ‘Liberal’, a narrative that had been building slowly since the days of Tony Abbott.

But if One Nation only got 6.4% of the vote, what’s caused this big shift now? What’s changed since the election?

On the face of things, not much has changed and that shows in the fact Labor still has roughly the same support now as it did then.

(Source: Resolve Political Monitor. The light grey line is Independents, the black line is Other)

But the Coalition has been in free-fall since the election. A part of that is likely to be from swing voters shifting over to Labor, but the real losses come from Coalition supporters moving to One Nation.

And the data seems to agree with this:

(Summary of three polls from Hasanakos and DemosAU from October last year, the labels on the side should read LNP, OTH, ALP, GRN)

And this data suggests a second source for One Nation’s growth: people who vote for minor parties are starting to coalesce around One Nation. Hanson has two things that people like Clive Palmer or those other randos who keep popping up at elections lack: credibility and name recognition. She comes across as someone who really believes in what she is saying, because she’s been saying it long before it was popular, and because she’s been saying it for so long she’s now become a household name: she’s no longer some kooky old lady ranting about the Chinese, she’s got actual political achievements under her belt and has had influence on legislation this past decade.

But the coalescing of ‘Other’ voters is not a huge deal. After all, there never were that many of them in the first place. The real question is why has the Coalition lost votes to One Nation?

Firstly, the Coalition is in a bad shape. It hasn’t been effective in communicating its policies and is embroiled in internal squabbles. It doesn’t inspire confidence and it is bereft of most of its most best performing MPs due to successive losses.

The second problem is that a lot of the moderate voters already jumped ship for independents or Labor, so now all they have is die-hards and conservatives. They try to pander to this fringe, but they fail for one simple reason:

#### You can’t out-Pauline Hanson Pauline Hanson.

One Nation is often described as a ‘protest party’ or a ‘party of grievances’. That is, it’s a party you vote for when you’re angry about something the major parties are ignoring. The Greens sometimes get given this appellation as well, but it’s especially true of One Nation as anger and suspicion are rife among their voters. They are overwhelmingly distrustful of politicians, far more than any other party’s voters.

(Source: Australian Election Study, 2025)

As a whole, One Nation’s platform revolves around populist ideas and the belief Australia needs to return back to ‘the good old days’. It is anti-elite and anti-intellectual, rejecting climate change, scornful of ‘wokeness’ and highly nationalist. Economically, it treads a line between libertarian and socialist, wanting a small government but also wanting a return of the manufacturing jobs of yesteryear (which would require massive government interference in the market).

All of these ideas, however, orbit around a single issue: immigration.


(Source: Redbridge, December 2025. The graph shows what percentage of voters for each party ranked immigration as their 1st, 2nd or 3rd most important issue)

One Nation voters are highly motivated by a fear of immigration. They believe Australia is bringing in too many people and the country can’t handle the numbers from an infrastructure/housing perspective. They also often believe that excessive immigration (particularly from the ‘wrong sort of countries’) will destroy the social fabric of Australia.

For the longest time, this was never an issue. Firstly, immigration only began to rise significantly during the Howard years (1996-2007). The Coalition saw immigration as a sort of ‘magic pudding’: you could keep bringing in young, skilled workers who’d prop up the economy.

Now, this strategy was not without merit, but the issue is that the country began to rely so heavily on immigration to keep things going, that now it is difficult to easily stem immigration without disrupting the system. This has lead both sides to put off any sort of true immigration reform.

The other reason this wasn’t an issue was also because of Howard. Howard was a master politician, able to convince you he’d do one thing while really doing the opposite. His most famous quote is quite possibly this one from the 2001 election during the Tampa Affair: “We will decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come.” This was about asylum seekers, and Howard’s policies (which were eventually supported by Labor as well) made it seem like the government had a handle on immigration. Unlike the USA, Australians did not have ‘illegal immigrants’ ‘invading’ the country. There was a clear perception that if you were here, it was because the government had decided you were safe.

Now, this narrative has begun to change in recent years and this change has helped fuel the rise of One Nation.

During the pandemic, immigration numbers plummeted, to the point we had negative net migration. After the pandemic, net migration rapidly jumped to its highest levels, largely due to a clearing of the backlog from those years where no one was allowed into the country. Over the years, there has also been a shift in the demographics migrating to Australia: the proportion of Europeans has been decreasing, and in particular people from Asia (especially Indians and Chinese) are now becoming one of the major groups. We’re also in a period of high inflation and poor housing affordability, and migration is an easy scapegoat for those problems.

Despite the Coalition’s attempts to make itself look tough on immigration, it’s got the same tarnish Labor has of being corrupt and self-serving, and the numbers show that Liberal and Labor alike have supported high immigration. The Coalition has tried to course-correct by drawing battle lines on this matter, but like I said before, you can’t out-Hanson Hanson. She’s been arguing this for years and thus has far more credibility on this matter. If voters want low immigration, they’ll vote for someone they know will actually fight for it.

But these have been bubbling around for a while: why is it only now that One Nation is getting so much support?

Firstly, Hanson benefited from gaining Barnaby Joyce, who also has strong name recognition and speaks to a similar cohort of voters. His defection is the highest-profile since Mark Latham (former Labor opposition leader), but unlike Latham he actually has decent approval ratings (in rural seats, at least). It gives her a sheen of legitimacy now she has a former government minister (not to mention former deputy PM) on her side.

However, there’s more to it than that. While the Coalition began bleeding support to One Nation immediately after the election, the big surge only started in December 2025. What happened last December? The Bondi Massacre. It doesn’t matter that one of the killers was born here and his father entered under John Howard’s government. Or indeed, that just makes the issue more poignant: both the ALP and the Coalition have let in the ‘wrong sort’ of people. The point is that there is a subset of the population that is afraid of immigrants from certain countries and of certain backgrounds. This attack made those concerns real in a much more visceral way than high house prices ever could.

In the aftermath of the shooting, the Coalition started off attacking Labor and focused on the issue of antisemitism. Not only did they botch this tactic on several occasions (most notably when, after complaining Labor was acting too slow, they started complaining Labor was rushing things), but Pauline Hanson took this as an opportunity to say ‘I told you so’. She presented simplistic solutions to this sort of violence and stuck to them. They were positions she’d always held and now she finally had an audience who was ready to hear it.

There has been a lot of this anti-immigration rhetoric going around for the past year. The neo-nazi groups in Australia and their Reclaim Australia rallies have probably been the most visible. Whether they can keep up this anger is a bigger question. Will people calm down if Labor manages to reduce immigration back to pre-pandemic levels? Will they argue that numbers have always been too high and that enough is enough? Will farmers, who often rely on migrant workers to pick their produce, turn away from One Nation if its policies affect their livelihood?

The biggest question of all, though, is this: will One Nation win seats in the House of Reps at the next election?

They probably will. With their numbers so high, it’s likely that there are just some pockets of voters where they have enough support to win, either outright or thanks to preferences.

The thing is, though, One Nation could very easily begin to flounder by the next election. It happened before and it can happen again. These numbers are still a lot higher than last time, but it’s not impossible that they’re partly a result of the Coalition being consumed with internal rivalries and not promoting its policies. Perhaps Angus Taylor can keep his party in line enough to ensure they can act like an actual opposition and not some kind of petulant government in exile. This is unlikely, because Taylor is the sort of opportunistic Liberal that is driving the distrust in politicians we see today. And he’s an idiot.

A troubling question, which has until now been little more than a joke than a serious possibility, is will we one day see a Prime Minister Hanson?

The short answer is no, because Hanson is a senator and it is highly unconventional for a PM to sit in the Senate (and even if they did, they would resign and run for a seat in the Lower House). But more seriously, could One Nation end up as part of the Coalition to form government?

I do not see this happening in the near future. First and foremost, the Liberals will need to win back inner-city seats and it will be difficult for them to do so with both the Nationals and One Nation dragging them to the right. They might be able to gain some outer suburban seats, but even then it probably wouldn’t be enough because those are the same seats Hanson would be trying to win. The Coalition already has essentially every rural seat in the country, so any One Nation gains there will come at their expense. They’re all competing over the same (quite small) fraction of support.

Conventional wisdom says Australian politics is won in the centre and Labor now quite clearly holds the centre. Even if the Coalition lost seats to One Nation, to enter into an alliance with them would be to force themselves into opposition indefinitely. The Liberals would lose the ability to expand and contest Labor- or independent-held and would likely end up being consumed by One Nation (or even the Nationals). And once One Nation destroys the Coalition, it can’t grow much further. Labor’s support still remains high enough to win an election on preferences, thanks to independents and Greens voters (I note the teal independents have a high preference flow to Labor in part because of tactical voting by Labor supporters in those electorates).

At worst, One Nation could win at least one seat and the Liberals gain enough seats to form a minority government with them (but not form a coalition with them). This would be no different from the Turnbull or Morrison governments except they’d have to deal with One Nation in the Upper and Lower Houses. Even then, there would be other independents (eg Bob Katter, the Teals) who would likely be available to work with instead. If the Liberals still need to deal with a huge crossbench, then Labor could even end up having an easier time forming a minority government.

Now, why is it that Australian politics is so centrist? Why am I so certain a far-right coalition could not form government? The biggest factor is compulsory voting. Australians tend to be very cautious (and perhaps even fearful) when it comes to any sort of vote and so prefer to stick with what’s safe. Hanson is still quite clearly on the fringe of politics and while she may have fervent followers that would outnumber dedicated Liberal voters, she doesn’t have enough to outnumber the masses of swing voters that exist across the country.

It’s important to note as well that preferential voting means One Nation can lose in races where it might have won had it been first-past-the-post. It is tempting to draw comparisons with the UK (centre-left with a huge majority of the seats but shallow vote share, a centre right headed for oblivion and an ascendant populist party), but this would be mistaken. I additionally note that preferences could also be what hands One Nation victories in some tight races; this is not something you can easily predict. The point I wish to make, however, is simply that One Nation superceding the Liberals does not automatically mean they’ll win seats held by Liberals.

The other reason it’d be hard for Hanson to win support is demographic-based: the borderline (and sometimes openly) racist policies from the Hansonite fringe are not going to appeal to a country whose population is largely born overseas (and often of the very ethnicities she villainises). I’d need to do a proper analysis of the demographics to give precise details on how important this will be, but again, it will be hard to expand beyond those rural electorates. Of course, there might be some recent migrants who are happy to shut the doors to new arrivals, but I still find it hard to believe they’d want anyone associated with Hanson to represent them.

The difference between Hanson and Donald Trump is that Trump is an opportunist. His position changes at his whim, with no clear ideological underpinning; voters can project onto him their own beliefs and don’t take anything he says too seriously. He’s just a personality with a fanbase of supporters who are convinced he’s their saviour.

Hanson’s weakness comes from the fact she has been so consistent. She cannot change her views to suit the times, and even if she did no one would believe it. Unlike Trump, she cannot walk both sides of the street, and (thanks to Howard) she does not have ‘illegal immigrants’ as a target: when she complains about immigrants, it’s not ‘the worst of the worst’ she wants gone, it’s any that don’t look like her.

And finally, the reason I don’t think Hanson has any real prospect of governing the country, or even being a particularly powerful force, is the fact every political alliance she has formed has crumbled. Hanson is a strong personality who doesn’t like being told what to do and she often finds herself working with strong personalities who don’t like being told what to do (I pause here to note Barnaby Joyce crossed the floor to vote against his own party 28 times back when he was a senator). It remains to be seen whether she can hold her party together and how long she herself will continue to lead it.

All in all, One Nation is a dangerous force in Australian politics, and while the current rise is concerning, I am still abundantly confident Australia will not follow other nations down the dark path to right-wing despotism.

For now, keep an eye on the actual election results, both the upcoming Farrer by-election and the state elections in South Australia and Victoria. While voters have different priorities at state elections (immigration, for example, is not going to be much of an issue), it will still be interesting to watch how polling numbers translate into results and the way preferences flow.
