---
layout: post
title:  "The Uninspiring, the Ungovernable and the Unthinkable"
date:   2026-06-25 22:00:00 +1000
categories: Analysis
tags: state_election
---
It is difficult to think of an election in Australian history like this, where every key party is so disappointing.

## A Bit of History

The ALP came to power in 2014 after one term in opposition, defeating the Baillieu-Napthine government in a fairly narrow victory. The Coalition had won the previous election with the narrowest of majorities and were later reduced to a minority government, so the swing was not huge. It's also worth noting Tony Abbott was Prime Minister which was a drag on the Coalition.

In the 2018 election, Premier Daniel Andrews increased his lead substantially and Labor generally maintained strong approval ratings throughout his first term (excluding perhaps the brief period of the 'African gangs' scare campaign). The following election was of course the first post-COVID election: 2022. This period marked a significant shift in the perception of Andrews; he became viewed as a controlling figure, both by the public and within his own party. He reportedly had a very top-down approach to governing: his ministers were seen as almost bureaucrats who carried our his will rather than active participants in decision-making. Regardless, he was up against a very disorganised and disunited opposition headed by an unlikeable leader, Matthew Guy. Not to mention that, where it counted, Labor had shown themselves to be capable and hard-working. Sure, they were probably excessively strict with lockdowns, but that showed decisive action in light of the Morrison government's abrogation of responsibility. Andrews had also ahieved a lot of infrastructure investment, which is always popular.

Consequently, Labor won with an increased majority despite suffering a swing against them. It seemed that Andrews was untouchable. Which made it all the more surprising that, after promising to carry out his term to completion, he stepped down as leader in 2023. The real reason for this was speculated to be so that he could put his preferred successor in place (not defeating the 'Dictator Dan' accusations). This was Jacinta Allan, Minister for Transport and Infrastructure and Deputy Leader of the party. It is very important to remind readers that the ALP is governed by factions: to prevent discord between the left and right factions, leadership positions and ministries are carefully handed out. Allan was a member of Andrew's faction, the left, and so in order to placate the right, who had been waiting their turn to lead, the position of Deputy Leader was given to one of their members, Ben Carroll.

## The Allan Government

When Allan began her premiership, there was a narrative being built that she was planning to bring about a new way of governing: being more consultative with her ministers and relinquishing some of the centralisation of power that had occurred under Andrews. While this may have been the case, the government's actual plans and direction remained largely the same. There was still a large focus on infrastructure and there was still no significant attempts to cut spending to help service the state's debt. Often it has felt like this is a government making decisions based on what would endear voters to it rather than based on what is best for the state in the long-term. This has shown in a few different ways, from little things like free public transport for under-18s and seniors (before that got extended to everyone for a while) to the decision to push for work-from-home legislation which was quite explicitly made to be used as a wedge issue at the election.

Allan, it should be noted, represents a seat that is becoming quite marginal and which will definitely be intensely fought over between Labor, the Nationals and One Nation (and likely independents). The seat is Bendigo East, a relatively rural seat, and its demographics have been viewed as influencing Allan's actions, such as her opposition to gun reform and her refusal to ban duck shooting, both of which have drawn the ire of more progressive voters. The overlapping federal seat of Bendigo was also only narrowly won by the ALP in 2025, which is another bad sign for Allan.

## The Big Build

The state's infrastructure agenda, the Big Build, was the Andrews government's signature policy and it has come under increased scrutiny as time has gone on. Some of the projects, particularly the Suburban Rail Loop (SRL), have dubious business cases or are viewed as having been prioritised ahead of more important projects because of their electoral benefit (i.e. it's just pork barreling). This has given the impression of a profligate government, spending billions of money on things that are 'nice to have' instead of in more pressing, less flashy areas (e.g. repairing roads). Now, state debt is less of an issue than some people would have you believe. After all, government debt and household debt are two very different things. If the money is spent effectively on projects that end up improving the productivity of the state, or if the projects provide their own revenue, then the debt can be quite easily serviced over the long term provided the economy grows. That is a bit of a big if. Regardless, good infrastructure is more important than low debt, in my view, and I don't particularly hold any grudges over the Big Build. I also think that most Vitorians are relatively happy with the investment. After all, they voted for it. Plus, now the projects are being completed they're enjoying the benefits of them (look at the crowds at the opening of the Metro Tunnel). Perhaps after four years of it being drilled into their heads by the opposition and the media, voters have started to be more concerned about the state's debt, but it wasn't a winning issue for the Coalition at the last election and I'm sceptical it'll really change anyone's mind this time around.

The bigger issue, however is the corruption in the building industry and the unions. Like I said, debt is fine if the money is spent _effectively_. Reports have emerged alleging serious misappropriation of funds and criminal actions on building sites. Nick Mckenzie from The Age is probably the journalist most involved in investigating this and there is a long and tawdry list of crimes and rorts that he has uncovered which I won't repeat here because it'd take too long. Suffice to say none of it is good. The state government has been very cagey about this and there are signs that they may have known about the corruption and turned a blind eye to it. It makes one wonder if perhaps Andrews saw this coming and wanted to get out to avoid the repercussions, but that's purely speculation on my part. Allan, both as minister responsible under Andrews and now as premier when the details came to light, should have resigned over this. Her attempts to ignore the issue give off a cover-up vibe, particularly the government's combatitive relationship with the IBAC (toothless watchdog that it is) which should be free to investigate this thoroughly and bring those culpable to justice.

But it's too late now. Allan has dug her feet in and there is no point in Labor dropping her now. The moment to act has passed and it would not improve Labor's poll numbers substantially because the only real advantage Labor has over the Coalition is its perceived stability. Anyone upset with Labor now won't be placated by a change in leader and it won't happen anyway because Carroll (the most likely challenger) has insisted he's supporting Allan as leader (plus, given the left faction has a bigger majority in the caucus, he may not even have the numbers). Even so, we are in the odd situation where, as I alluded to, Labor could win but Allan herself could lose her seat. One has to wonder if some in the party are not secretly wishing for that.

## Crime

We Melburnians may have laughed at the Liberal Party's attempts back in 2018 to make us believe we were cowering under our sheets, too afraid to dine out because we were afraid of being atacked by gangs prowling he streets, but things have changed and now crime is actually a serious concern for many voters. The hard numbers and anecdotal evidence (even I have a cousin who had his car stolen) do suggest a worrying trend and that crime is increasing. One-time Liberal leader Brad Battin, a former policeman, tried very hard to make this election into a law and order campaign, but that kind of went nowhere because he got kicked out (more on that later). To push back against this narrative, Allan has implemented tougher bail laws and the whole 'adult time for adult crime' thing (another reason voters on the left have to be upset with her, especially given the government has walked back commitments to raising the minimum age of criminal responsibility to 14 by 2027).

I'm not a fan of the responses to this from either of the major parties. I do not believe that threatening tougher punishments is a very effective deterrant to criminal behaviour because people don't tend to stop and think about how badly they'll be punished before they commit a crime. Children especially aren't going to pay it much heed given how many young people naturally believe they're invincible. The bail law changes are probably more effective, since there have been some bad cases of people committing crimes while on bail, but all it takes is one example and the media and the opposition will start demanding they be even stricter. The real solution would be implementing programmes that target vulnerable youths and ensure they don't fall into a lfe of crime or that help those in prison return to normal life. But these things take time and look too soft, so they'll never be touted during an election period, when people want decisive and immediate action.

## Housing

This is possibly Labor's strongest card because housing affordability in Victoria is actually good relative to the rest of the country. Labor has been working to change planning laws, particularly about density and cutting red tape, in an attempt to increase housing supply without needing to continuously expand Melbourne. The most amusing moment in this debate had to be when Allan proposed 50 new 'activity centres' where apartments would be fast-tracked and many of the areas chosen were the wealthy eastern suburbs. It prompted residents in Brighton to start protesting the plan. The sight of these cashed-up NIMBYs chanting and waving their signs seemed, if you'll pardon the pun, pretty rich. It was seen as a clever move because not only are these desirable suburbs with good public services (i.e. the exact opposite of the urban fringe), but these electorates would never have voted for Labor anyway. Of course, this outcry does also highlight the fact there are those with vested interests who'd view lower housing prices as a negative.

The other big issue with housing relates to debt. It is the state's, quite heavy, land taxes. These were raised with two motives in mind: the first was that it was an easy way to increase revenue via a group that tends to skew wealthy (property investors) while also lowering prices by discouraging buying property (especially for short-term rentals like Air BnB). It was perhaps a victim of its own success in that it seems it _did_ lower housing prices, but in doing so it means that less people will be paying the tax over time. The land tax is sometimes viewed as a drag on the Victorian economy and adds to the general sense that the state is not an inviting place for investment in general. I'm not convinced low taxes do spur higher investment and growth in and of themselves, but of course there does eventually become a point where taxation is overly burdensome. Whether land tax itself is an issue though, I'm particularly not convinced. This is because, as I said, the state's house prices are lower than Sydeny, so people may decide to buy here for that reason, thus encouraging growth. Though, of course, the real drain on the economy would be business costs, not home ownership, and that's a bigger debate over taxation I don't have time for here.

With all of that said, the Labor Party is not in the best of shape. It is trying to win an unprecedented fourth term while its approval ratings are low and they have been plagued with not only economic headwinds but scandals and social unrest. In any normal circumstance, I'd say they were doomed to lose. Even _I_ don't particularly like the Allan government and think it's probably a good time for a change. Except for the fact these are _not_ normal times and the only 'serious' (I say that in the loosest sense) alternative is of course...

## The Victorian Liberal Party

Either the Victorian Liberals are idiots, or they have a self-harm kink. Honestly. There is no other explanation for how incompetent and stupid they have been during their time in opposition. It's more maddening than Allan's intransigence and has rendered them the most pathetic and derisible party in Australia. 

If the party had kept John Pesutto as leader, I seriously would have considered voting for them because I actually liked him. He seemed smart and reasonable, which I suppose is why the Liberals decided they had to get rid of him. For those who have lost track (or are bissfully ignorant to the party's internecine drama), I'll provide a recap.

After they snatched defeat from the jaws of victory, the Liberal party dumped Matthew Guy and installed Pesutto as leader. Pesutto had lost his seat during the 2018 election, but regained it in 2022. He would probably have replaced Guy even earlier if not for this time outside of politics. Being out of public office also gave him freedom to discuss state matters as he wished in the interrim, and would have made his appointment as leader feel like the Liberals had turned over a new leaf. Moderate, intelligent and scandal-free, Pesutto really looked like he had brilliant future ahead of him. Until it all came tumbling down.

In 2023, Liberal Party member Moira Deeming spoke at an anti-trans protest which was also attended by neo-Nazis (an easy mistake to make in Melbourne since everyone wears black, though the Nazi salutes really should have given it away). The debacle caught the attention of the media and it prompted Pesutto to call Deeming's position 'untenable' and he expelled her from the party. I want to make it clear that I think this was a sensible thing to do and if it had worked it would have squashed the scandal and the anti-trans issue completely. Unfortunately for him, it failed miserably: Deeming sued Pesutto after he refused to issue a statement that he did not consider her a Nazi sympathiser (which I can understand why he didn't, because it would have just drawn attention to this, but in retrospect he should have withdrawn his comments). What followed was, I think, best described with the words of Liberal Party elder Tony Barry as 'like the space shuttle Columbia slamming into the Hindenburg and then landing on the deck of the Titanic'. The legal farce lasted well over a year and provided plenty of fodder for the newspapers. When Deeming won her case, the combined costs Pesutto had to pay amounted to well over $2 million. He was at risk of going bankrupt which would have rendered him ineligible to sit in Parliament (let's just pause to dwell on how insane that outcome would have been: a politician costing their own party a seat out of spite), forcing the Victorian Liberal Party to loan him $1.5 million to avoid that. Deeming was then re-admitted to the party and is now the first-listed candidate in her upper house region after it was discovered the man who she'd lost the preselection to gave a character reference to a child abuser (the suspicious timing of this revelation, being after Deeming lost, leads one to think it was her campaign that leaked it so she could have a second chance, but that's just rumours).

The defamation case and its associated chaos damaged Pesutto immeasurably, he was ousted as leader in 2024 (the court case was still ongoing at the time, I note). The next leader was Battin, who had narrowly lost to Pesutto at the previous spill. This was viewed as a win by Deeming's side of the party and he elevated many of her supporters to the shadow cabinet (and notably left Pesutto out of it). These decisions upset members of the party and, coupled with his inability to shift the polling, resulted in him being ousted and replaced with current leader Jess Wilson.

Wilson is actually a pretty good choice for leader, strategically-speaking. She's young, so she brings an innate vitality to the campaign against a government that's seen as tired and old. She's a woman, which means the Labor Party can't easily claim the opposition is being sexist when it attacks Allan and either way we'll be seeing Victoria elect a female premier for the first time. Again, under any other circimstances, Wilson would win. But unfortunately she's leader of the only party in Australia that can give One Nation a run for the title of 'Most Ungovernable'. The Victorian Liberal Party is a schemozzle; they share the tarnish of the federal Coalition, but worse. Not only that, but they continuously put personal ambition and factionalism ahead of the greater good. They're also not endearing themselves to the various migrant communities that make up Melbourne. Take for instance the preselection for the seat of Werribee: this is an area with a growing Indian diaspora, and yet an Indian candidate with support from within the community was rejected by the Liberal's administrative committee. Instead, they preselected an Anglo-Saxon man. There is very little sense that the Liberal Party speaks to or understands the people it is trying to court the vote of. Some of these migrant communities respond very well to the economic policies of the Liberals—a lot of small business owners and those who believe in the 'have a go, get a go' philosophy—but they still vote Labor because the Coalition so often scapegoats immigrants.

I bring up Werribee in particular because the western suburbs of Melbourne are likely to be a key battleground this election. These seats are historically the Labor Party's safest seats, but they have grown increasingly marginal (Labor won a by-election in the seat of Werribee with 50.8% after preferences, a massive swing against them in a seat they won in 2022 with 60.9% two-party preferred). Part of this is a sense that Labor takes them for granted and so they get overlooked for funding compared to marginal seats. While both the Liberals and One Nation (more on them later) are not calibrated to appeal to these electorates, it's possible for more centrist independent candidates to gain support and win them instead.

Not to mention that the fact the Liberal Party seems to be held hostage by someone promoting anti-trans rhetoric who has, even accidentally, attended the same protests as neo-Nazis is not exactly going to help their cause. Anyone who would like that was never going to vote Labor anyway. Plus Victoria is quite a socially-progressive state: John Howard didn't call it "the Massachusetts of Australia" for nothing (in fact, he made that reference explicitly because of the 2018 Dan-slide).

I've said I'm dissatisfied with Labor, but I still do not believe the Liberals would improve Victoria's situation. The media love to bang on about the SRL's business case (or lack thereof), but it's progressed too far for it to be stopped without wasting huge amounts of money on literally nothing. We've had enough of that in this state already (e.g. the East-West Link and the Commonwealth Games). Any other Big Build projects the Liberals could look to cut are harder to argue against (for example, the long-awaited airport rail) or are already completed (the Metro Tunnel and the West Gate Tunnel).

I don't believe in pursuing a budget surplus just for the sake of it. The Liberals want to pay down the debt, but it can't all be achieved with public service cuts, especially not if they also intend to lower taxes. I don't think we really need a return to the Kennett years, and he already flogged off pretty much all of our last public assets so there's not much the Liberals _could_ do. Public service cuts are also a phantom saving, because what you save you end up spending on private consultants who can sometimes provide worse results and more inefficiencies. The best I would expect from a Liberal government is that they'd be more willing to be tough on the unions and crack down on corruption in the building sector, thus lowering the costs of infrastructure projects, but I don't know if I trust them to actually manage projects without causing waste in some other way. There's also hypothetical improvements to economic growth if we have lower taxes that encourages investment, but again, I'm not sold on that argument; it sounds like trickle-down economics.

And on top of all this, the final nail in the coffin for me, is their pledge to tear up the Victorian Treaty. This is the first and only treaty with First Nations people in the country, a massive step forward for Reconciliation. It saddens me that the Liberals would try to use this beautiful moment for political gain, but then again the Liberal Party opposed the Apology and the Voice to Parliament, so I can't say I'm particularly surprised they'd oppose this too.

The Liberals themselves know they have a mountain to climb, and that's because they're suffering from the same woes as their federal counterparts with the threat of...

## One Nation

Could they actually win this election? I don't think they have a serious chance of winning an outright majority, but it is within the realm of possibility that they could form a coalition with the Coalition wherein they could even be the senior partner (i.e. having more seats than the other two). Rural seats are at risk, but the Nationals in Victoria tend to run candidates that are trusted locals in their electorates which gives them an edge. Suburban voters are much less likely to vote One Nation, particularly in more diverse seats, making further inroads difficult, though not impossible if the vote gets split enough in a way that benefits them. There are immigrants who support ON, those who want to pull up the metaphorical drawbridge, and they may appeal to the oft-ignored outer urban residents, but I'm not so sure they'll be flocking to ON in droves. But people are very dissatisfied with both sides of politics, especially in Victoria, and this idea that 'anything else is better than what we have now' or the desire to just blow up the whole two-party system is a strong driver for One Nation's support.

One Nation leading this state would be a disaster, to put it mildly. I cannot imagine how they could handle running the state and we don't even know who will lead them in Victoria yet. Will we end up with a Hanson puppet government? This whole situation is just so foreign and unthinkable that I honestly don't know what would come of it. Maybe once the election starts and One Nation is forced to explain its policies, we'll get a clearer idea of what they hope to achieve.

There's one reason big reason why, for a long time, I've been convinced Labor will still win despite all their baggage: Victorian Labor are excellent at campaigning. They were meant to lose in 2022, and they pulled that off. They will have a harder time with Allan in charge, who doesn't have the cut-through or cult of personality that Andrews had, and with Wilson as an opponent, who has not had a 'lobster with a mobster', but they're in no way guaranteed to lose. The opposition is also impressively managing to find new ways to shoot itself in the foot: just recently our good friend Moira Deeming has accused Matthew Guy of grabbing her "violently in some kind of headlock" during a public function. You start to wonder if Deeming is secretly a Labor plant, trying to tear down the Liberals from within. If she is then I have to say she's done a stellar job.

With all of that said and done, the final outcome worth analysing is a Labor-Greens/independent minority government. This is harder to assess the likelihood of, but there are a couple of potential gains to be made for the Greens. One such example is the seat of Pascoe Vale, which turned marginal last election. If Labor loses more than 12 but less than about 16 or 17 seats, it could lead to a minority government. I have to say that this result would be incredibly amusing to watch because it would likely result in the exact opposite of everything everyone who has been trying to bring Labor down wants. I do not think the Greens have any policies on bringing down debt or increasing business investment, to put it mildly. Especially if Allan loses and then Carroll becomes premier and we end up with a Labor Right premier somehow being more progressive than a Labor Left one.

All in all, while this election is uniquely unpleasant, it is also going to be fascinating to watch.




