---
layout: post
title:  "The Fall of Farrer"
date:   2026-05-11 20:00:00 +1000
categories: Analysis
tags: One_Nation
---
With One Nation winning its first seat in the House of Representatives in its own right, a mix of hysteria and fatalism seemed to descend upon the political class. I think this moment requires some calm, rational thought as we digest these results.

I would like to start by saying this result is not an 'upset': One Nation's poll numbers suggested this could happen and polls leading up to the by-election painted a pretty clear picture of what was to come. In addition, Farrer is exactly the sort of seat that was seen as fertile ground for One Nation. In short, this election proves what we had assumed to be true is in fact reality: the Coalition is losing ground to One Nation and voters have, to use Hanson's words, 'had a gutful' of the major parties, willing to turn to any alernative to send a message.

There are some things I want to discuss about the political state-of-play we find ourselves in, looking back on how it came about.

Given this result, it is likely One Nation will win seats at the next federal election at the expense of the Coalition. Farrer is very much Coalition heartland, and if they can lose this, then they can lose any seat they currently hold. However, winning these seats will not be enought to net One Nation victory. The Coalition already has these electorates and has the lowest number of seats it's ever had. If the Coalition and One Nation start to squabble over these seats, they're not likely to lead to anything significantly better than what they currently have. Any serious path to victory will require suburban seats, those that swung to Labor at the last election. Given Peter Dutton lost them, it is hard to believe Hanson (or a party passing itself off has Hanson-lite) could win them, but then again maybe Dutton was just uniquely repulsive to voters.

If the Coalition were to regain its inner-urban seats (the 'blue ribbon' seats they lost to the 'teals'), it would require them to reject Hansonism. If, in the process, they lost their rural seats, it is hard to see how the Liberals and Nationals could feasibly form some kind of 'grand coalition' with Hanson's party without suffering from the same conniptions that plagued the short-lived Ley-Littleproud era.

Possibly, they could accept One Nation's support for confidence and supply to form a minority government, so One Nation members do not become cabinet ministers, but I don't think that result would really be worth fretting over, given the Coalition had to deal with Hanson in the Senate last time they were in power. It could even lead to the two major parties working together more often to by-pass Hanson's obstructionism. And if she did vote against a Coalition government, triggering an election, she'd likely just be handing it to one of the major parties since the voters would just want a stable government that gets on with the job.

On this topic, of a formal alliance, there has been a lot of confused messaging coming out of the Coalition. It is surprising they do not have a more unified position on this matter, given how plainly obvious it was that they'd get asked about it. Shadow Treasurer Tim Wilson equivocated on it, before recently asserting he'd never support a One Nation coalition: "We traditionally form a coalition with the National Party, but it’s up to the Australian people to decide who they want to vote for," he said. When interrogated further about it a day later he said “I have never, ever, ever, and never, ever, ever, will make such a statement in favour of such an alignment". Other moderate Liberals, including Senator Dave Sharma, have also spoken against it. Clearly, there are still Liberals who think they can salvage the Broad Church of St John Howard by reaching out to the centre instead of the far-right.

I think it is in the best interest of the Liberal party to reject Hanson. I've said before why conceding to her on issues is a path to failure, so I won't belabour that point, but there's more to it than just shifting to the centre. Andrew Hastie has long been touted as a possible Liberal leader, and while his personal ideology bears similarities with Hanson's, he has not refrained from denouncing her and her party. The same can be said of Matt Canavan, the current Nationals Leader. The specifics of what they would do differently to Hanson are not necessarily clear, which probably blunts their effectiveness, but they are much more effective political communicators than Angus Taylor (who seems to have faded into the wallpaper). There's a fair bit to say about their strategy, and I'd like to read up a little more on them before making a proper analysis of it, but their firm dismissal of Hanson is an attempt to deprive her of legitimacy.

Now, one thing that does help give her legitimacy is offering her preferences. Which is something the Coalition has done on multiple occasions now. Focusing back on the Farrer by-election, One Nation needed those preferences to get over the line. If every Coalition voter had instead preferenced indepedendent Michelle Milthorpe over One Nation, she would have won. Now, the real questions are whether this would have actually happened and why the Coalition didn't do it.

Voters don't blindly follow how-to-vote cards. In the high-profile race we have here in particular, I imagine voters would have been quite well aware of whom they were voting for and knew the consequences of their decisions. If they had any qualms about voting for One Nation, they wouldn't have done it, regardless of what they were told to do. Indeed, for Milthorpe to get that extra 14 percentage points that got her to her final two candidate preferred vote, someone other than Greens voters had to be preferencing her, and the preference flows were not overwhelmingly for One Nation (according to Antony Green's blog it was 44.1% to 55.9%, in One Nation's favour), so clearly the preference decision didn't simply gift One Nation the victory.

Regardless, why would the Coalition want to give any assistance to someone who is currently their greatest threat? The answer lies in something I described in my earliest One Nation post:
"Hanson is a strong personality who doesn’t like being told what to do and she often finds herself working with strong personalities who don’t like being told what to do."
During the election, the media was speculating wildly about the One Nation candidate, David Farley, and his allegiance to the party. He'd made some remarks that contradicted Hanson on immigration, had previously been interested in running as a Labor candidate at an earlier election, and then voiced support for Milthorpe at the previous election. All in all, he did not seem to be a One Nation true believer. The question being asked was if he, like so many of One Nation's previous candidates, would eventually quit the party after being elected.

I think the Coalition is banking on that and hoping they'll be able to win the seat back next election, with his defection diminishing One Nation's credibility. The alternative, supporting Milthorpe, would have given the seat to someone who would likely have retained the seat as easily as McGowan and Haines held onto Indi across the Murray: independents are very hard to dislodge, just ask Tim Wilson.

Now, Farley might not defect, but if Hanson can't control what her candidates say on the campaign trail, it is hard to see how she could keep them in line in parliament. I can understand why the Coalition would be hopeful about this strategy and honestly, I think one of the most effective preventatives against One Nation is seeing them with power. It's like a vaccine (a comparison which Hanson might resent, given her previous statements on vaccines): if a few members of One Nation are elected, they prove themselves to be a bunch of incompetent boobs, unable to govern themselves let alone a nation, and the voters realise their mistake and their vote share collapses. This is essentially what happened when they won 11 seats in the Queensland Parliament and it could happen again.

And this is also why a Liberal-National-One Nation coalition is a terrible idea: how can you present yourself as a stable government if you're beholden to one of the most unstable parties in history?

Antony Green wrote an insightful retrospective on the 2001 Queensland election in light of the One Nation by-election win, that I encourage you to read. There are a lot of parallels with the current situation and it is that stability point that I think is most imporant. Instability (perceived or actual) tends to result in landslide wins for whoever is viewed as the least risky, even if they aren't necessarily loved (vide Fraser 1975, Abbott 2013 or the aforementioned 2001 Queensland election). I do not seee a Coalition government beholden to One Nation managing to stay in power for very long. I'm not convinced the electorate's desire to stick it to the major parties is enough to stomach a chaotic and incompetent government.

Of course, a lot of this presupposes One Nation will always remain the flock of unherded cats it currently is. There is still room for all possibilities. But if I know one thing from my years watching Australian politics play out, it's that you should never underestimate the incompetence of One Nation.
